# muthuga2-tinreyd2-pdada2-thm2
muthuga2-tinreyd2-pdada2-thm2
This project can be run by using the command "make" (after using module load llvm/6.0.1 if needed) and also the commands "make run_tests" and "make run_animation." After that, the tests can all be run with ./run_tests. Occasionally, an error may occur, in which case the command "make clean" should be run, and then "make" should be run again. There are several tests making sure our file parsing and reading works properly to actually create a graph, a bft test which uses a small portion of airport and route data to check that the BFT results in an accurate traversal from any starting node, and graph coloring and betweenness centrality tests that ensure these algorithms work properly on the same small set of graph data. Running ./run_animation will draw a graph using a truncated set of airport data including about a tenth of the data in order to create a visual represenation of the graph, where the size of an airport node is dependent on its betweenness centrality (the more central a node is, the larger it is) and its color is dependent on graph coloring. This function can be run with other data sets by changing the initizalization file at the top of the main function in drawandalgorithms, though care must be taken as betweenness centrality takes an incredibly long time to run and as such can only function on truncated sets of data. Larger sets can be drawn if betweenness centrality is commented out and the size of the nodes is set to be constant.

All of the code that creates the graph and the BFT, as well as the data, are contained within the graph folder. The lab_inheritance folder contains the drawable classes. Algorithms.cpp contains betweenness centrality and graph coloring, and drawandalgorithms.cpp contains the main function which draws a graph. Within the graph folder, there are a few sets of data. airports.dat and routes.dat contain the default airport and route data from OpenFlights. shortairports.dat and shortroutes.dat are files that contain 5 airports and 5 routes respectively in order to be used for testing and for ease of use. truncairports.dat and trairports.dat are truncated datasets which cut off about 9/10 and 19/20 of the data respectively, so they can be used for betweenness centrality. Using these datasets, the main function was used to create a number of graphs. trairgraph.png and truncatedgraph.png contain graphs drawn with betweenness centrality and graph coloring using routes.dat as well as trairports.dat and truncairports.dat respectively. smallgraph.png is another graph drawn similarly but with the shortairports.dat and shortroutes.dat data sets. Finally, full_graphcoloring.png contains a graph made with graph coloring but not betweenness centrality, using the entire airports.dat and routes.dat data sets. Also, graph_drawing.png contains whatever image was last created with ./run_animation.

As far as formatting, the graph class is created with three unordered_maps, a node class, and an edge class. The maps use the id of the airports as the key. The node contains relevant airport information, and the edge contains relevant route information and calculates and stores its length as well. One map stores the airport nodes as the value, another stores the routes outgoing from an airport in a vector, and the last stores the routes incoming to an airport in a vector (this last one is used only for graph coloring). Given the correct formatting of the input files, these functions should work on any set of data.
